docs(root): documentation about testing with RTL (#246)
mi6/ic-design-system: src/content/structured/get-started/testing-with-react-testing-library.mdx

---
path: "/get-started/install-components/testing-with-react-testing-library"

navPriority: 8

date: "2023-01-20"

title: "Testing with React Testing Library"

subTitle: "How to test components with React Testing Library."

contribute: "https://github.com/mi6/ic-design-system/tree/main/src/content/structured/get-started/testing-with-react-testing-library.mdx"
---

## About React Testing Library

[React Testing Library (RTL)](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-testing-library/intro) provides a set of utility functions which interrogate the DOM tree in order to build maintainable React tests. The recommended approach with React Testing Library is to test React components based on how the users view the components rather than the implementation of the component. For example, a user would view a button by the label 'Add', so the library provides a method called `getByText()` to facilitate that.

## Shadow DOM Testing Library

> However, RTL does not provide utility functions which go beyond the `shadowDOM`. As `@ukic/react` are React wrapped web components, which use the shadowDOM, it is not possible to exclusively use RTL to create React tests. Fortunately, with the addition of [Shadow DOM Testing Library](https://github.com/KonnorRogers/shadow-dom-testing-library), it is possible to select elements in the shadowDOM and interact with them by using methods provided by RTL. Shadow DOM Testing Library provides functions with 'Shadow' prefixed prior to the query type (e.g. `getByShadowText()`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, RTL does not provide utility functions which go beyond the `shadowDOM`. As `@ukic/react` are React-wrapped web components, which use the shadowDOM, it is not possible to exclusively use RTL to create React tests. Fortunately, with the addition of [Shadow DOM Testing Library](https://github.com/KonnorRogers/shadow-dom-testing-library), it is possible to select elements in the shadowDOM and interact with them by using methods provided by RTL. Shadow DOM Testing Library provides functions with 'Shadow' prefixed prior to the query type (e.g. `getByShadowText()`).
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think a hyphen is required here for 'React-wrapped'. It would make more sense for it to have no hyphen as it could potentially confuse the reader as it is not code.

Reviewer: @GCHQ-Developer-465 Hey, a hyphen is required because it's a [compound adjective](https://www.grammarly.com/blog/compound-adjectives/). We're using "React-wrapped" to describe the web components in this context

```tsx
// DOM tree for IcAlert
<ic-alert class="dark hydrated" message="Foo" role="alert">
  <ShadowRoot>
    ...
    <ic-typography class="ic-typography-body hydrated">
      <ShadowRoot>
        <slot />
      </ShadowRoot>
      Foo
    </ic-typography>
    ...
  </ShadowRoot>
</ic-alert>
```

```tsx
import { IcAlert } from "@ukic/react";
import { render, waitFor } from "@testing-library/react";
import { screen } from "shadow-dom-testing-library";

it("renders IcAlert", async () => {
  const { getByRole /* container */ } = render(<IcAlert message="Foo" />);

  // Wait for IcAlert to hydrate before continuing to view the full IcAlert DOM tree.
  await waitFor(() => {
    expect(getByRole("alert")).toHaveClass("hydrated");

>     // container can also be used with querySelector to select ic-alert

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // 'container' can also be used with querySelector to select ic-alert
```

});
```

## Examples with IcSelect and IcTextField

Below are additional examples on testing `@ukic/react` components using RTL and Shadow DOM Testing Library using `IcSelect` and `IcTextField`.

### IcSelect

```jsx
// Select.tsx
import { useState } from 'react';
import { IcSelect } from '@ukic/react';
import { IcMenuOption } from '@ukic/web-components';

interface IcMenuOptions {
    options: IcMenuOption[]
}

const Select = ({ options }: IcMenuOptions) => {
    const [selectedValue, setSelectedValue] = useState<string | undefined>(
        undefined
    );
    return (
        <IcSelect
            label='Title'
            onIcChange={(e) => setSelectedValue(e.detail.value)}
            options={options}
            value={selectedValue}
        />
    );
};
  
export default Select;
```

```jsx
// Select.test.tsx
import { fireEvent, render, waitFor } from '@testing-library/react';
import { screen } from 'shadow-dom-testing-library';
import Select from '../components/Select';
import userEvent from '@testing-library/user-event';

const options = [
  { label: 'Americano', value: 'americano' }
  { label: 'Espresso', value: 'espresso' },
]

> describe('IcSelect', () => {

Reviewer: Could you make left indentations more consistent across the different code sections please?

         */
        expect(screen.getByShadowLabelText('Title', { shallow: true })).toBeInTheDocument();
    })

    it("should render the correct number of options in the menu", async () => {
        const { container } = render(<Select options={options} />);
        const select = container.querySelector('ic-select');

        await waitFor(() => {
            expect(select).toHaveClass('hydrated');
        });

        const allOptions = await screen.findAllByShadowRole('option');

        expect(await (allOptions).length).toBe(2);
    });

    it('should change select value using userEvent', async () => {
        // Using testing-library/user-events to select an option from ic-select
        const user = userEvent.setup();
        const { container } = render(<Select options={options} />);
        const select = container.querySelector('ic-select') as HTMLIcSelectElement;

        await waitFor(() => {
            expect(select).toHaveClass('hydrated');
        });

        // ic-select uses a button element to trigger the dropdown so using the button role as the selector
        const btn = await screen.findByShadowRole('button');
        await user.click(btn);

>         // Selecting Epresso from option list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // Selecting 'Espresso' from the option list.
```

Reviewer: At the moment, there isn't a consistency with use of full stops

        const { container } = render(<Select options={options} />);
        const select = container.querySelector('ic-select') as HTMLIcSelectElement;

        await waitFor(() => {
            expect(select).toHaveClass('hydrated');
        });

        // Invoking icChange method to select an item from the option list
        fireEvent(select, new CustomEvent('icChange', { detail: { value: 'americano' }}));

        expect(select).toHaveValue('americano');
    });
})

```

### IcTextField

```jsx
// TextField.tsx
import { IcTextField } from "@ukic/react";
import { useState } from "react";

interface NameProps {
    name: string
}

const TextField = ({ name }: NameProps) => {
    const [value, setTextFieldValue] = useState<string>('');

    const handleInput = (event: CustomEvent) => {
        setTextFieldValue(event?.detail?.value)
    }

    return (
        <IcTextField
            label={name}
            onIcInput={handleInput}
            value={value}
        />
    )
}

export default TextField;

```

```jsx
// TextField.test.tsx
import { render, waitFor } from '@testing-library/react';
import { screen } from 'shadow-dom-testing-library';

> import Select from '../components/Select';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import TextField from '../components/TextField';
```

import userEvent from '@testing-library/user-event';

> describe('IcTexField', () => {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
describe('IcTextField', () => {
```

    it('should change textField value while typing', async () => {
        const user = userEvent.setup();
        const { container } = render(<TextField name='Foo' />);

>         const textfield = container.querySelector('ic-text-field') as HTMLIcTextFieldElement;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        const textField = container.querySelector('ic-text-field') as HTMLIcTextFieldElement;
```

        await waitFor(() => {

>             expect(textfield).toHaveClass('hydrated');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            expect(textField).toHaveClass('hydrated');
```

        });

>         const input = await findByShadowLabelText(textfield, 'Foo');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        const input = await findByShadowLabelText(textField, 'Foo');
```

>         // Using userevent type method to input a value into IcTextField

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // Using the userEvent 'type' method to input a value into IcTextField
```

        await user.type(input, 'Bar');

>         expect(textfield).toHaveValue('Bar');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        expect(textField).toHaveValue('Bar');
```

---
path: "/get-started/install-components/testing-with-react-testing-library"

navPriority: 8

date: "2023-01-20"

title: "Testing with React Testing Library"

subTitle: "How to test components with React Testing Library."

contribute: "https://github.com/mi6/ic-design-system/tree/main/src/content/structured/get-started/testing-with-react-testing-library.mdx"
---

## About React Testing Library

[React Testing Library (RTL)](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-testing-library/intro) provides a set of utility functions which interrogate the DOM tree in order to build maintainable React tests. The recommended approach with React Testing Library is to test React components based on how the users view the components rather than the implementation of the component. For example, a user would view a button by the label 'Add', so the library provides a method called `getByText()` to facilitate that.

## Shadow DOM Testing Library

> It is not possible to exclusively use RTL to create React tests which include `@ukic/react` components, as `@ukic/react` components consist of React-wrapped web components which use the [shadow DOM](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Web_Components/Using_shadow_DOM) (`<ShadowRoot>`). RTL does not provide utility functions which traverse beyond the shadow DOM. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is not possible to exclusively use RTL to test `@ukic/react` components, as `@ukic/react` components are React-wrapped web components which use the [shadow DOM](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Web_Components/Using_shadow_DOM) (`<ShadowRoot>`). RTL does not provide utility functions which traverse beyond the shadow DOM. 
```

This was a long sentence so I've tried to simplify it

Author: Thanks. I was going nose blind with this paragraph

```tsx
// DOM tree for IcAlert.
<ic-alert class="dark hydrated" message="Foo" role="alert">
  <ShadowRoot>
    ...
    <ic-typography class="ic-typography-body hydrated">
      <ShadowRoot>
        <slot />
      </ShadowRoot>
      Foo
    </ic-typography>
    ...
  </ShadowRoot>
</ic-alert>
```

```tsx
import { IcAlert } from "@ukic/react";
import { render, waitFor } from "@testing-library/react";
import { screen } from "shadow-dom-testing-library";

it("renders IcAlert", async () => {
    const { getByRole /* container */ } = render(<IcAlert message="Foo" />);

    // Wait for IcAlert to hydrate before continuing to view the full IcAlert DOM tree.
    await waitFor(() => {
        expect(getByRole("alert")).toHaveClass("hydrated");

        // 'container' can also be used with querySelector to select ic-alert.
        // expect(container.querySelector('ic-alert')).toHaveClass('hydrated');
    });

    expect(await screen.findByShadowText("Foo")).toBeInTheDocument();
});
```

## Examples with IcSelect and IcTextField

> Below are additional examples on testing `@ukic/react` components using RTL and Shadow DOM Testing Library using `IcSelect` and `IcTextField`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below are additional examples on testing `@ukic/react` components using RTL and Shadow DOM Testing Library with `IcSelect` and `IcTextField`.
```
